[docs] #414: move API specification to the docs (#417)
hyperledger/iroha-2-docs: src/api/torii-endpoints.md

# Torii Endpoints

> TODO: write some intro, maybe outline the contents.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<!-- TODO: write some intro, maybe outline the contents. -->
```

|   Y    |    -    |        N         |   -   | [`FindError::AssetDefinition(AssetDefinitionId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror) |
|   Y    |    Y    |        Y         |   N   | [`FindError::Asset(AssetId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror)                     |

## Status

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `GET`
- **Endpoint:** `/status`

**Responses:**

`200 OK` reports status as JSON:

::: details Sample response

```json5
// Note: while this snippet is JSON5 (for better readability),
//       the actual response is JSON
{
  /**
   * Number of connected peers, except for the reporting peer itself
   */
  peers: 3,
  /**
   * Number of committed blocks (block height)
   */
  blocks: 1,
  /**
   * Total number of accepted transactions
   */
  txs_accepted: 3,
  /**
   * Total number of rejected transactions
   */
  txs_rejected: 0,
  /**
   * Uptime with nanosecond precision since creation of the genesis block
   */
  uptime: {
    secs: 5,
    nanos: 937000000,
  },
  /**
   * Number of view changes in the current round
   */
  view_changes: 0,
}
```

:::

::: warning

> Almost all fields are 64-bit integers and should be handled with care in JavaScript (todo: explain the issue with
> `serde`). Only the `uptime.nanos` field is a 32-bit integer. See

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Almost all fields are 64-bit integers and should be handled with care in JavaScript. <!--todo: explain the issue with
`serde`--> Only the `uptime.nanos` field is a 32-bit integer. See
```

:::

### Sub-routing

To obtain the value of a specific field, one can append the name of the field to the path, e.g. `/status/peers`. This
returns the corresponding JSON value, inline, so strings are quoted, numbers are not quoted, and maps are presented as
in example above.

## Transaction

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `POST`
- **Endpoint:** `/transaction`
- **Expects:**
  - **Body:** SCALE-encoded[^1] [`VersionedSignedTransaction`](/api/data-model-schema#versionedsignedtransaction)

**Responses:**

| Status | Description                                                            |
| ------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 200    | Transaction Accepted (But not guaranteed to have passed consensus yet) |
| 400    | Transaction Rejected (Malformed)                                       |
| 401    | Transaction Rejected (Improperly signed)                               |

[^1]:
    For more information on Parity SCALE Codec check
    [Substrate Dev Hub](https://docs.substrate.io/reference/scale-codec/) and codec's

>     [GitHub repository](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec). TODO: link to our own article about SCALE

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    [GitHub repository](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec). <!--TODO: link to our own article about SCALE-->
```

      key.

**Responses:**

| Response           | Status | Body                                                                                       |
| ------------------ | ------ | ------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------ |
| Success            | 200    | [`VersionedBatchedResponse<Value>`](/api/data-model-schema#versionedbatchedresponse-value) |
| Conversion Error   | 400    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Conversion(String)`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)      |
| Evaluate Error     | 400    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Evaluate(String)`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)        |
| Unauthorized Error | 401    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Unauthorized`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)            |
| Signature Error    | 401    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Signature(String)`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)       |
| Permission Error   | 403    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Permission(String)`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)      |
| Find Error         | 404    | [`QueryExecutionFail::Find(FindError)`](/api/data-model-schema#queryexecutionfail)         |

> TODO: ask the team about unauth error vs account not found

Author: I am not sure about how `Unauthorized` works. If the client makes a query using an account which is not found, will it be `QueryExecutionFail::Unauthorized` or `QueryExecutionFail::Find(FindError::Account(_))`?

Author: More context:

- https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/issues/3951

It should be deleted from the doc.

---
outline: [2, 3]
---

# Torii Endpoints

TODO: write some intro, maybe outline the contents.

## Endpoints for API

TODO: link to config reference, "will use torii.api_address as a base address for endpoints"

### Transaction

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `POST`
- **Endpoint:** `/transaction`
- **Expects:**
  - **Body:** [`VersionedSignedTransaction`](/api/data-model-schema#versionedsignedtransaction) encoded with
    [Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec)

**Responses:**

| Status | Description                                                            |
| ------ | ---------------------------------------------------------------------- |
| 200    | Transaction Accepted (But not guaranteed to have passed consensus yet) |
| 400    | Transaction Rejected (Malformed)                                       |
| 401    | Transaction Rejected (Improperly signed)                               |

### Query

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `POST`
- **Endpoint:** `/query`
- **Expects:**
  - **Body:** [`VersionedSignedQuery`](/api/data-model-schema#versionedsignedquery) encoded with
    [Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec)
  - **Query parameters:**

>     - **`start`:** Optional parameter in queries where results can be indexed. Use to return results from specified

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **`start`:** An optional parameter in queries where results can be indexed. Use to return results from a specified
```

>       point. Results are ordered where can be by id which uses rust's

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
      point. Results are ordered by id, which uses Rust's
```

      [PartialOrd](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cmp/trait.PartialOrd.html#derivable) and
      [Ord](https://doc.rust-lang.org/std/cmp/trait.Ord.html) traits.

>     - **`limit`:** Optional parameter in queries where results can be indexed. Use to return specific number of results.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **`limit`:** An optional parameter in queries where results can be indexed. Use to return a specific number of results.
```

>     - **`sort_by_metadata_key`:** Optional parameter in queries. Use to sort results containing metadata with a given

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **`sort_by_metadata_key`:** An optional parameter in queries. Use to sort results containing metadata with a given
```

|   Y    |    N    | [`FindError::Account(AccountId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror) |

#### Asset Not Found 404

Whether each prerequisite object was found and [`FindError`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror):

| Domain | Account | Asset Definition | Asset | [`FindError`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror)                                     |
| :----: | :-----: | :--------------: | :---: | ----------------------------------------------------------------------------------- |
|   N    |    -    |        -         |   -   | [`FindError::Domain(DomainId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror)                   |
|   Y    |    N    |        -         |   -   | [`FindError::Account(AccountId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror)                 |
|   Y    |    -    |        N         |   -   | [`FindError::AssetDefinition(AssetDefinitionId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror) |
|   Y    |    Y    |        Y         |   N   | [`FindError::Asset(AssetId)`](/api/data-model-schema#finderror)                     |

### Events

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Protocol Upgrade:** WebSocket
- **Endpoint:** `/events`

> #### Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
I don't think this header is needed tbh

> After handshake, client should send [`EventSubscriptionRequest`](/api/data-model-schema#eventsubscriptionrequest). Then

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
After a handshake, the client should send an [`EventSubscriptionRequest`](/api/data-model-schema#eventsubscriptionrequest). Then
```

> server sends [`EventMessage`](/api/data-model-schema#eventmessage). Messages are encoded with

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
the server sends an [`EventMessage`](/api/data-model-schema#eventmessage). Messages are encoded with
```

[Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec).

#### Notes

Usually, the client waits for Transaction events.

> TODO: "usually" is cool, but there are other `Event` types. Consider change section name to "Notes about transaction
> events"? NEED HELP

Transaction event statuses can be either `Validating`, `Committed` or `Rejected`.

Transaction statuses proceed from `Validating` to either `Committed` or `Rejected`. However, due to the distributed
nature of the network, some peers might receive events out of order (e.g. `Committed` before `Validating`).

> It's possible that some peers in the network are offline for the validation round. If the client connects to them while

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Some peers in the network may be offline for the validation round. If the client connects to them while
```

they are offline, the peers might not respond with the `Validating` status. But when the offline peers come back online
they will synchronize the blocks. They are then guaranteed to respond with the `Committed` (or `Rejected`) status
depending on the information found in the block.

### Blocks Stream

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Protocol Upgrade:**`WebSocket
- **Endpoint:** `/block/stream`

> #### Pipeline

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
same as above

> Client should send [`BlockSubscriptionRequest`](/api/data-model-schema#blocksubscriptionrequest) to initiate

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The client should send a [`BlockSubscriptionRequest`](/api/data-model-schema#blocksubscriptionrequest) to initiate
```

> communication after WebSocket handshake. Then server sends [`BlockMessage`](/api/data-model-schema#blockmessage).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
communication after the WebSocket handshake. Then the server sends a [`BlockMessage`](/api/data-model-schema#blockmessage).
```

> Messages are encoded with [Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Messages are encoded with the [Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec).
```

> #### Notes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

> Via this endpoint client first provides the starting block number (i.e. height) in the subscription request. After

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Via this endpoint, the client first provides the starting block number (i.e. height) in the subscription request. After
```

> sending the confirmation message, server starts streaming all the blocks from the given block number up to the current

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
sending the confirmation message, the server starts streaming all the blocks from the given block number up to the current
```

  where "a.b.c" is a path of the field (e.g. `sumeragi.block_time_ms`).
- **Responses:**
  - `200 OK`: Field was found and either doc or value is returned in json body.
  - `404 Not Found`: Field wasn't found

::: tip

If the requested field has more fields inside of it, then all the documentation for its inner members is returned as
well. Here is an example for getting a field `a.b.c`:

**Example:** getting top-level documentation for `Torii` and all the fields within:

```bash
curl -X GET -H 'content-type: application/json' http://127.0.0.1:8080/configuration \
    -d '{"Docs" : ["torii"]} ' -i
```

:::

### Configuration

::: warning

TODO: Will change as part of the config RFC

:::

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `POST`
- **Endpoint:** `/configuration`
- **Expects:**
  - **Body:** One configuration option is currently supported: `LogLevel`. It is set to the log-level in uppercase.
    ```json
    {
      "LogLevel": "WARN"
    }
    ```
    Acceptable values are `TRACE`, `DEBUG`, `INFO`, `WARN`, `ERROR`.
- **Responses:**
  - `200 OK`: Log level has changed successfully. The confirmed new log level is returned in the body.
  - `400 Bad Request`: request body malformed.

>   - `500 Internal Server Error`: Request body valid, but changing the log level failed (lock contention).

Reviewer: for lines 125-197: some restructuring is needed

for the sake of consistency, there should be a section for the configuration endpoint with subsections for different methods

Author: TBH, I would like to delete documentation of these endpoints entirely. Not only their API is inconvenient for using and for documenting; they will be probably deleted at all as part of the config RFC.

Not sure what to do with it now. Can we remove them and put a TODO mark like

> TODO: document configuration endpoints when we decide if we refactor/delete/keep them.

?

Reviewer: I suggest you comment them out with `<!-- -->` and put a todo there

### Health

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `GET`
- **Endpoint:** `/health`

Responses with `200 OK` and a current status of peer as a JSON string:

```json
"Healthy"
```

### Pending Transactions

> TODO: if it is for _internal use only_, remove this endpoint from the docs?

Reviewer: I agree that if it's for internal use only, it shouldn't be here

If we don't want to lose this info, it might make sense to have a list of internal-use-only endpoints in the main repo

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Encoding:** [Parity Scale Codec](#parity-scale-codec)
- **Method:** `GET`
- **Endpoint:** `/pending_transactions`

_Internal use only._ Returns the transactions pending at the moment.

> ## Endpoints for Status/Metrics

Reviewer: do you think it makes sense to separate these from the other endpoints? the "api version" is neither a metric nor a status but it is a part of this section, while "health" is about a current status but is not included here

suggestion: what if we list all available endpoints alphabetically within the same "Endpoints" section? it'll be easier for users to find the info, and it'll create less confusion since no one is probably going to read this page from the start to the end, they'll look for info on a specific endpoint.

I see the benefits of having the status/metrics section, but we should make it less confusing, I think + it still makes sense to list endpoints alphabetically within each part

Author: The distinction between endpoints is made because they belong to different routers, e.g. 

```bash
# on 8080 port
"http://localhost:8080/transaction"

# on 9090 port
"http://localhost:9090/status"
```

API endpoints are configured with `torii.api_url` (which is required), status/metrics - with `torii.telemetry_url` (which is optional).

I don't see any reason to have separate routers for that, actually. I will ask the team soon to have a single one. However, since there is no decision yet, we need to document how Iroha works right now...

> what if we list all available endpoints alphabetically within the same "Endpoints" section?

Agree.

I think we need to clearly specify that some endpoint belongs to API router, and some to Telemetry router. And somewhere in the document describe the difference between them.

Reviewer: Then we need "API Endpoints" and "Telemetry Endpoints" sections instead of the ones we currently have. And in the beginning of the page we can briefly explain what you can find in each section

Author: We discussed that we will merge the routers into a single one:

- https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha/issues/3950

Therefore, we can assume that there are no two separate routers.

- **Method:** `GET`
- **Endpoint:** `/status`

**Responses:**

`200 OK` reports status as JSON:

::: details Sample response

```json5
// Note: while this snippet is JSON5 (for better readability),
//       the actual response is JSON
{
  /**
   * Number of connected peers, except for the reporting peer itself
   */
  peers: 3,
  /**
   * Number of committed blocks (block height)
   */
  blocks: 1,
  /**
   * Total number of accepted transactions
   */
  txs_accepted: 3,
  /**
   * Total number of rejected transactions
   */
  txs_rejected: 0,
  /**
   * Uptime with nanosecond precision since creation of the genesis block
   */
  uptime: {
    secs: 5,
    nanos: 937000000,
  },
  /**
   * Number of view changes in the current round
   */
  view_changes: 0,
}
```

:::

::: warning

Almost all fields are 64-bit integers and should be handled with care in JavaScript (todo: explain the issue with
`serde`). Only the `uptime.nanos` field is a 32-bit integer. See `iroha_telemetry::metrics::Status` (todo: should we
link this struct to anywhere?).

:::

#### Sub-routing

To obtain the value of a specific field, one can append the name of the field to the path, e.g. `status/peers`. This

> returns the corresponding JSON value, inline, so strings are quoted, numbers are not and maps are presented as above.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
returns the corresponding JSON value, inline, so strings are quoted, numbers are not quoted. and maps are presented as in example above.
```

tx_amount_bucket{le="1"} 0
tx_amount_bucket{le="2.5"} 0
tx_amount_bucket{le="5"} 0
tx_amount_bucket{le="10"} 0
tx_amount_bucket{le="+Inf"} 2
tx_amount_sum 26
tx_amount_count 2
# HELP txs Transactions committed
# TYPE txs counter
txs{type="accepted"} 1
txs{type="rejected"} 0
txs{type="total"} 1
# HELP uptime_since_genesis_ms Network up-time, from creation of the genesis block
# TYPE uptime_since_genesis_ms gauge
uptime_since_genesis_ms 54572974
# HELP view_changes Number of view_changes in the current round
# TYPE view_changes gauge
view_changes 0
```

:::

Learn [how to use metrics](/guide/advanced/metrics).

### API Version

- **Protocol:** HTTP
- **Method:** `GET`
- **Endpoint:** `/api_version`

**Responses:**

`200 OK`: The current version of API used by Iroha returned as a JSON string. Grabbed from the genesis block's version,
so at least a minimal subnet of 4 peers should be running and the genesis be submitted at the time of request.

```json
"1"
```

## Parity Scale Codec

For more information on codec check [Substrate Dev Hub](https://docs.substrate.io/reference/scale-codec/) and codec's
[GitHub repository](https://github.com/paritytech/parity-scale-codec).

> TODO: link to our own article about SCALE (https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs/issues/367)

Author: Some endpoints describe their input/output structures and say that they will be coded using SCALE codec. I think we need to have some link which describes what it is anyway.

> TODO: link to our own article about SCALE (https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs/issues/367)

Reviewer: What if we make it a footnote instead?

> TODO: link to our own article about SCALE (https://github.com/hyperledger/iroha-2-docs/issues/367)

Author: Indeed, will do.

## Reference Iroha Client Implementation

> TODO: should we put link to the `iroha_client` crate?

Author: Not sure =)

> TODO: should we put link to the `iroha_client` crate?

Reviewer: let's remove it then
